Cascading Style Sheets, or CSS, is a style
sheet language famous for making
websites look pretty.
By default, a browser will render
HTML as a boring black and white document.
CSS allows you to describe the presentation
of this markup by modifying the size,
color, positioning, and layout of HTML elements.
It was first released in 1996 and evolved
into CSS 3 by 1999.
The language continues to evolve to this
day with new features, but there
will never be a CSS 4, just updates
to the existing language.
The typical CSS rule starts with a selector
that can be matched to an element in the HTML document.
You then use braces to create a declaration
block that contain properties that change
the appearance of that element.
This is known as a CSS rule.
But the tricky thing is that style sheets cascade.
A style sheet might contain multiple
rules that apply to the same element.
This creates a hierarchy and rules
that are more specific will
overwrite the rules of their parents.
In other words, the order of your CSS rules matter.
In addition, some elements will
inherit the styles of their parent,
but others will not.
Ultimately, the browser uses the concepts
of cascade, specificity and inheritance
to control which styles are applied to an element.
To get started, open up a style tag
in any HTML document.
A selector can target all HTML
elements of a certain type, multiple
related elements with a custom
class, or a single element with an ID.
Now think of every HTML element like a box.
The content is in the middle,
followed by padding, border, and a margin.
The amount of real estate used by every
area in the box can be customized by defining
properties like padding and margin.
They can take explicit pixel values
or responsive values that are
relative to the parent element or a percentage
of the viewport itself.
Now these boxes will bump into each other
to make up a web page, but you can use
tools like flex layout and grid
layout to control how they flow
together in a sophisticated way.
It can also detect user interaction
with pseudo selectors like hover.
CSS also makes it possible to add
logic to your code with variables or custom properties
and by making media queries that can apply styles conditionally
based on the size or type of device.
And it can even handle complex animations
with transitions and keyframes.
This has been Cascading Style Sheets in 100 Seconds.
Hit the like button and subscribe
if you want to see more short videos like this.
Thanks for watching and I will see you in the next one.